In this tutorial we will create our first material. Let's set a color parameter to it and learn how to
change this parameter dynamically in C ++ . In order to create a new material in Unreal Engine,
in the content browser, right-click and select the material from the menu. Let's name our
material M underscore BaseColor. It will be responsible for the color of our mesh.
We double-click on our material, the material editor opens - this is a specialized editor
in the Unreal Engine, which is responsible for processing the parameters of the material.
A material is a special kind of asset in an unreal engine, which is responsible for the visual part:
how static mesh, skeletal mesh, particle system and other objects will look like.
To be more precise, the material is a shader - a mini subroutine that runs on the GPU and calculates the
colors and position of pixels in our scene. Let's add a color parameter to our material. To do this,
in an arbitrary area of ​​the blueprint, right-click and enter vector in the search.
Scroll up the list. In the constant category, select a vector with four components.
This node is responsible for color. The first 3 components are rgb and the fourth is alpha.
Connect the blueprint thread to the Base Color. In the details panel, we can adjust the color by
clicking on constant. The color picker opens. And let's pick a shade of
red. Or we can edit the components of the vector through the input fields.
To quickly add constant or vector nodes to the scene, we can use the keyboard.
Press and hold one on the keyboard and click in an arbitrary area of ​​the blueprint.
A constant node is added. For example, we can connect it in metallic.
If we click with the two pressed, then a vector with two components, with a three with three
and with a four, our 4-component node appears.
Press aplly, save and return to the map. We can already use our material. To do this,
just drag & drop and drag it onto some object on the scene, for example, on our static mesh.
Or by clicking on the actor, select our material in the materials category.
Let's turn our color into a parameter. To do this,
right-click on the node and select convert to parametr from the menu.
We name our parameter color, click apply, save and return to the map.
Let's create another kind of aset called material instance. To do this, right-click
on our material and select create material instance. We double click on this asset.
The instance material editor opens. This kind of asset is an instance of the
material. It was created in order to be able to adjust the parameters of the material that
are brought out. In this case, in the details panel, we have only one parameter
that we created - color. Click on it and change the color to green.
We save the instance. We can duplicate this asset by
clicking on it and pressing Ctrl-W. This combination works with all blueprints. Open our
next instance and change its color to blue. With this method, we can create a set of colors
using only one material. But of course, we will not use this approach.
We will learn how to access the material in C ++ and set the color that we want.
Back to the code. Let's get access to our material,
which we put in the editor and change the value of its color parameter.
This is done very simply. We only need two lines of code. We will use a function
that each primitive component has from which our static mesh component inherits. It's
called CreateAndSetMaterialInstanceDynamic. The function takes one argument - the index of the
material. We have one material for the static mesh, so we specify 0. Based on the
usual material, it creates an instance material, sets it to the component and returns to it
. In fact, an analogue of what we did in the editor. Create a pointer to an object that
this function returns. The pointer is of type UMaterialnstanceDynamic. Let's call it DynMaterial.
We also include the header file, where this type is declared #include
"Materials / MaterialInstanceDynamic.h"
Next, we need to check the validity of our pointer,
whether the object was created or not. We check for null, write if (DynMaterial)
And if the pointer is null, then we use the function of the UMaterialInstanceDynamic class
called SetVectorParameterValue.
This function has two arguments. The first argument is the name of the parameter in the material. We
named it color and the second parameter is this structure FLinearColor. This structure is
also responsible for color definition. You and I have already used FColor
when we printed a message on the screen. The difference between these types is that FLinearColor is a 32-bit color,
and FColor is 8-bit. FLinearColor also has predefined colors. If we press f12 with you,
we will see the given list. Let's use yellow. Save and run editor.
Click play.
Each material has a yellow color, regardless of the dynamic materials
that are currently on them. We put down the value of the parameter color = yellow in the code.
Let's refine the code a bit. Let's create a property
that will be responsible for the default color of our static mesh.
We create a new variable in our structure of type FLinearColor.
Let's call it color. And give it the default value FLInearColor :: Black. We make the color property
variable . Copy the UPROPERTY macro on top of the variable and change the category name to design.
Go to the .cpp file.
And in SetVectorParameterValue we change the second parameter from yellow
to the value of the variable from our BaseGeometryData structure.
Let's turn all our code into a function. To do this, create the SetColor function in the .h file.
It will have one
FLinearColor parameter by a constant reference.
We will pass the color of our material through this parameter.
Right-click on the function. Choose quick actions and refactoring,
create declaration / definition.
The body of the function was created in the .cpp file. We transfer the code that we wrote in BeginPlay to this function.
Let's replace the second parameter of the SetVectorParameterValue function with just
color - the parameter of our SetColor function.
And call the SetColor function on BeginPlay with the GeometryData.Color parameter.
Run build, compile our project.
Click play.
Our static meshes are black by default, because the value of the color parameter is black. But now we
can control this parameter. Let's move to the GeometryData category of our actor.
The color variable is displayed as in the material. We can edit
this vector component-wise , or by clicking on it, call the color picker and assign colors to our actors.
We start. The colors of the static meshes have changed to those that we specified in the property.